Before we can dive further into
how dynamic typing works and
both its advantages and
its disadvantages we need to talk a bit
about the types that exist in JavaScript.
The types of data that you
can store in a variable.
Again you don't say this directly
through the variable declaration,
but there are six primitive
types in JavaScript.
All right now, one second.
Big Word Alert.
What do we mean by primitive type?
A primitive type is a type of data
that represents a single value.
In other words,
something that isn't an object.
Because remember, an object is
a collection of name value pairs.
A primitive type, on the other hand,
is just a single value.
And again,
there are six types in JavaScript.
So let's talk about each
of the primitive types.
First, we have undefined.
We've already talked about
this at some length.
Undefined represents a lack of existence.
And it's what the JavaScript engine
sets variables to initially and
it will stay undefined unless you
set the variable to have a value.
So you really shouldn't use
this as far as setting a value.
You shouldn't say a variable
equals undefined.
Just let that be the thing that means
the code has never set the value.
But you can certainly test for it.
The second primitive type is null.
Null also represents lack of existence.
This one is better for you to use when you
want to say that something doesn't exist,
that the variable has no value.
So, leave undefined for the engine,
and you can use null, the keyword
N-U-L-L lowercase, for your variables when
you want to set them equal to nothing.
Next is Boolean.
This is familiar to most programmers.
This is either true or false,
just one of two values.
And in JavaScript it's literally the word
true or the word false, lowercase.
Next, comes number,
another primitive or simple type.
In JavaScript, actually, there's only one
numeric type, and it's called number.
It's a floating point number,
meaning that essentially,
there's always some
decimals attached to it.
Unlike other programming languages,
others might have integer and decimal,
and other specific numeric types,
JavaScript only has one.
And while you can fake it
as far as integers and
other types of mathematical
numbers are concerned,
there really is under the hood,
only one type called number.
And it's a floating point number.
And it can make math a little weird.
Another familiar one is string,
this is another base
primitive type in JavaScript.
It's a sequence of characters and
both single quotes and
double quotes can be used to specify
that we're dealing with a string.
In some programming languages,
a string is more complex and
treated as a sequence of characters.
But in JavaScript,
a string is considered a primitive type.
And finally the sixth one,
this one is new and it's called symbol.
It's used in ES6 or ECMAScript 6,
which is the next version of JavaScript.
It's being constructed and
not fully supported by all browsers.
So we're not gonna talk about this here
but as time goes on in this course I'll
occasionally post bonus lectures,
especially throughout this year as
more and
more is talked about with ECMAScript 6.
But for our purposes we're just
going to ignore the symbol
as a primitive type in this course.
However it's just good that
you know that it's coming.
So that said,
the six primitive types in JavaScript,
undefined, null, Boolean,
number, string, and symbol.
Are you bored yet?
I know.
Well, we just needed to establish this
because understanding the primitive types,
and the fact that we're
dealing with dynamic typing.
That is, that the engine is figuring out
what type of variable is on the fly,
is key to understanding
certain aspects of JavaScript.
And really weird, funky problems and
bugs that you can come up with that can
be difficult to debug or understand.
So, we needed to first establish types and
we'll focus on primitive types here.
And then,
we're going to move on to another topic.
Then combine these two
topics to fully understand
some things that people normally
have problems with in JavaScript.